I'd like to start with a simple question
why do to poor make so many poor
decisions I know it's a harsh question
but take a look at the data the poor
borrow more safe less smoke more
exercise less drink more and eat less
healthfully why well the standard
explanation was once summed up by the
briefs Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher
and she kept already a personality
defect a lack of character basically now
I'm sure not many of you would be so
blunt but the idea that there's
something wrong with the poor themselves
is not restricted to mrs. Thatcher some
of you may believe that the poor should
be held responsible for their own
mistakes and others may argue that we
should help them to make better
decisions but the underlying assumption
is the same there's something wrong with
that if we could just change them if we
could just teach them how to live their
life if they would only listen and to be
honest this was what I thought for a
long time it was only a few years ago
that I discovered that everything I
thought I knew about poverty was wrong
it all started when I accidentally
stumbled upon a paper by a few American
psychologists they had traveled 8,000
miles all the way to India for a
fascinating study and it was an
experiment with sugarcane farmers you
should know that these farmers collect
about sixty percent of their annual
income all at once right after the
harvest and this means that they're
relatively poor one part of the year and
rich the other and the research is
awesome to do not used as before and
after the harvest what they subsequently
discovered completely blew my mind
the farmers court much worse on the test
before the harvest the effects of living
in poverty it turns out corresponds to
losing 14 points of IQ now to give you
an idea that's comparable to losing a
night's sleep or the effects of
alkylation a few months later I heard
that elder Shaffir a professor at
Princeton University and one of the
authors of this study was coming over to
Holland where Aled so we met up in
Amsterdam to talk about his
revolutionary new theory of poverty and
I can sum it up in just two words
scarcity mentality it turns out that
people behave differently when they
perceive the things to be scarce and
what that thing is doesn't much matter
whether it's not enough time money or
food you all know this feeling when
you've got too much to do or when you've
put a breaking for lunch and your blood
sugar takes a dive
now this narrows your focus to your
immediate left to the sandwich you've
got to have now the meeting with
starting at five minutes or the bills
that has to be paid tomorrow so the
long-term perspective goes out the
window you could compare it to a new
computer that's running send heavy
programs at once it gets slower and
slower making errors eventually freezes
not because it's a bad computer but
because it has too much to do at once
and the poor have the same problem
they're not making dumb decisions
because they are dumb
but because they're living in a context
in which anyone would make dumb
decisions so suddenly I understood why
so many of our anti-poverty programs
don't work investments in education for
example are often completely ineffective
poverty is not a lack of knowledge a
recent analysis of 201 Studies on the
effectiveness of money management
training came to the conclusion that it
has almost no effect at all now don't
get me wrong it's just not to say that
the poor don't learn anything they can
come out wiser for sure
but it's not enough or as Professor
Shaffir told me it's like teaching
someone to swim and then throwing them
in a stormy sea
I still remember sitting there perplexed
and it struck me that we could have
figured this aloud decades ago I mean
these psychologists didn't need any
complicated brain scans they only had to
measure the Foreman's IQ and IQ test or
invented more than a hundred years ago
actually I realized I've read about the
psychology of poverty before George
Orwell one of the greatest writers who
ever lived experience poverty firsthand
in the 1920s the essence of poverty he
wrote back then is that it annihilates
the future and he marveled as quote how
people take it for granted they have the
right to preach at you and pray over you
as soon as your income falls below a
certain level now those words are every
bit as resonant today the big question
is of course what can be done modern
economies have a few solutions of best
lives we could help the poor with the
paperwork or send them a text message to
remind them to pay their bills now this
type of solution is hugely popular with
modern politicians mostly because well
they cost next to nothing these
solutions are I think a symbol of this
era in which we so often treat the
symptoms that ignore the underlying
cause so I wonder why don't we just
change the context in which the poor Liz
or going back to our computer analogy
why keep tinkering around with the
software when we can easily solve the
problem by installing some extra memory
instead now at that point professor
Shaffir responded with a blank look and
after a few seconds he said oh I get it
you mean you want to just hand out more
money to the poor to eradicate poverty
sure that'd be great but I'm afraid that
brand of left-wing politics you've got
an Amsterdam it doesn't exist in the
States
but is this really an old-fashioned
leftist idea I remembered reading about
a Northland something that has been
proposed by some of history's leading
thinkers the philosopher it's almost
more first hinted at it in his book
utopia more than 500 years ago and its
proponents have spent a spectrum from
the left to the right from the civil
rights campaigner Martin Luther King to
the economist Milton Friedman and it's
an incredibly simple idea basic income
guarantee what it is well that's easy
it's a monthly ground enough to pay for
your basic needs food shelter education
it's completely unconditional so no
one's going to tell you what you have to
do for it and no one's going to tell you
what you have to do with it the basic
income is not a favor but a right
there's absolutely no stigma attached so
as I learned about the true nature of
poverty I couldn't stop wondering is
this the idea we've all been waiting for
could it really be that simple and in
the three years that followed I read
everything I could find about basic
income I researched the dozens of
experiments that have been conducted all
over the globe and it didn't take long
before I stumbled upon a story of a town
that had done it had actually eradicated
poverty but then nearly everyone forgot
about it this story starts in dawson
canada in 1974 everybody in this small
town was guaranteed a basic income
ensuring that no one fell below the
poverty line and at the start of the
experiment an army of researchers
descended on the town for four years all
went well but then a new government was
voted into power and the new canadian
cabinet so little point to the expensive
experiment so when it became clear there
was no money left to analyze the results
the researchers decided to back their
files away in some 2,000 boxes 25 years
went by and then
evelyn 4j a canadian professor found the
records
and for three years she subjected the
data to all manner of statistical
analysis and no matter what she tried
the results were the same every time
the experiment had been a resounding
success
Evelyn 4j discovered that the people in
dolphin had not only become richer but
also smarter and healthier the school
performance of kids improved
substantially the hospitalization rate
decreased by as much as 8.5% domestic
violence incidents were down as rare
mental health complaints and people
didn't quit their jobs the only ones who
worked a little less were new mothers
and students who stayed in school longer
similar results have since been found in
countless other experiments around the
globe from the u.s. to India so here's
what I've learned when it comes to
poverty we the rich should stop
pretending we know best we should stop
sending shoes and steady beer to the
poor to people we have never met and we
should get rid of the vast industry of
paternalistic bureaucrats when we can
simply hand over their salaries to the
poor they're supposed to help because I
mean the great thing about money is that
people can use it to buy things they
need instead of things that
self-appointed experts think they need I
mean just imagine how many brilliant
scientists and entrepreneurs and writers
like George Orwell are now with the ring
away in scarcity imagine how much energy
and talent we would unleash if we get
rid of poverty once and for all I
believe that a basic income would work
like venture capital for the people and
we we can't afford not to do it because
poverty is hugely expensive just look at
the cost of child poverty in the US for
example it's estimated at 500 billion
dollars each year in terms of higher
health care spending higher dropout
rates and more crime now this is an
incredible waste of human potential but
let's talk about the elephant in the
room
how could we ever afford a basic income
guarantee well it's actually a lot
cheaper than you may think
what they did in Dawson is they financed
it with a negative income tax and this
means that your income is stuffed up as
soon as you fall below the poverty line
and in that scenario according to our
economist best estimates for a net cost
of 175 billion a quarter of US military
spending 1 percent of GDP you could lift
all impoverished Americans above the
poverty line you could actually
eradicate poverty now that should be our
goal the time for small thoughts and
little nudges is fun I really believe
that the time has come for radical new
ideas and basic income is so much more
than just another policy it is also and
complete rethink of what work actually
is and in that sense it will not only
free the poor but also the rest of us
nowadays millions of people feel that
the jobs of little meaning or
significance a recent poll among 230,000
employees in 142 countries found that
only 30% of workers actually like their
job and another poll found that as much
as 37 percent of British workers have a
job that they think doesn't even need to
exist
it's like Brad Pitt says in Fight Club
too often we're working jobs we hate so
we can buy we don't need
now don't get me wrong
I mean I'm not talking about the
teachers and the garbageman and the care
workers here if they stopped working
we'd be in trouble now I'm talking about
all those well-paid professionals with
excellent resumes who earned their money
during strategic transected peer to peer
meetings while brainstorming the value
add almost interrupted co-creation in
the networked society
or something like that just imagine
again how much Stemmons were wasting
simply because we tell our kids they'll
have to earn a living or think of what a
math whiz working at Facebook lamented a
few years ago the best minds of my
generation are thinking about how to
make people click and I'm a historian
and if history teaches us anything it is
that things could be different
there is nothing inevitable about the
way we structured our society and
economy right now ideas can and do
change the world and I think that
especially in the last few years it has
become abundantly clear that we cannot
stick to the status quo that we need new
ideas I know that many of you may feel
pessimistic about a future of rising
inequality xenophobia and climate change
but it's not enough to know what we're
against we also need to be for something
Martin Luther King didn't say I have a
nightmare
he had a dream so here's my dream I
believe in a future where the value of
your work is not determined by the size
of your paycheck but by the amount of
happiness you spread and the amount of
meaning you give I believe in the future
where the point of education is not to
prepare you for another useless job but
for a life well-lived I believe in a
future where in existence without
poverty is not a privilege but a right
we all deserve so here we are here we
are we've got the research we've got the
evidence and we've got the means now
more than 500 years of it's almost more
first wrote about basic income and a
hundred years after George Orwell
discovered the true nature of poverty we
all need to change our worldview because
poverty is not a lack of character
poverty is the lack of cash sense
[Applause]